.TH MARKQL 1 "March 2026" "MarkQL" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
markql \- query HTML documents using SQL-like syntax
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B markql
[\fB\-\-query\fR \fIQUERY\fR]
[\fB\-\-query\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-input\fR \fIPATH_OR_URL\fR]
[\fB\-\-write\-mqd\fR \fIFILE.mqd\fR]
[\fB\-\-write\-mqp\fR \fIFILE.mqp\fR]
[\fB\-\-artifact\-info\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-mode\fR \fIduckbox|json|plain|csv\fR]
[\fB\-\-display_mode\fR \fImore|less\fR]
[\fB\-\-highlight\fR \fIon|off\fR]
[\fB\-\-timeout\-ms\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-color=disabled\fR]

.B markql
\fB\-\-lint\fR [\fIQUERY\fR] [\fB\-\-format\fR \fItext|json\fR]

.B markql
\fB\-\-interactive\fR [\fB\-\-input\fR \fIPATH_OR_URL\fR]

.B markql
\fBexplore\fR \fIINPUT_HTML\fR

.B markql
\fB\-\-help\fR

.B markql
\fB\-\-version\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmarkql\fR runs SQL-style queries on HTML. It can read input from files, URLs,
or standard input and outputs rows in table, JSON, plain, or CSV formats.
It also supports versioned `.mqd` document snapshots and `.mqp` prepared queries.
These artifact workflows are currently experimental.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-query\fR \fIQUERY\fR
Execute a single inline query.
.TP
\fB\-\-query\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR
Execute queries from a SQL script file.
.TP
\fB\-\-input\fR \fIPATH_OR_URL\fR
HTML input source. If omitted, input is read from standard input. `.mqd` document snapshots are also accepted.
.TP
\fB\-\-write\-mqd\fR \fIFILE.mqd\fR
Parse the active input once and persist it as a versioned document snapshot.
.TP
\fB\-\-write\-mqp\fR \fIFILE.mqp\fR
Parse and validate one SQL statement once and persist it as a versioned prepared-query artifact.
.TP
\fB\-\-artifact\-info\fR \fIFILE\fR
Inspect experimental artifact metadata and compatibility information.
.TP
\fB\-\-interactive\fR
Start REPL mode.
.TP
\fB\-\-lint\fR [\fIQUERY\fR]
Validate syntax and semantic rules without execution.
You can pass query text directly or combine with \fB\-\-query\fR/\fB\-\-query\-file\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-format\fR \fItext|json\fR
Output format for lint diagnostics. Valid only with \fB\-\-lint\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-mode\fR \fIduckbox|json|plain|csv\fR
Output renderer for query results.
.TP
\fB\-\-display_mode\fR \fImore|less\fR
Display full output (\fBmore\fR) or compact output (\fBless\fR).
.TP
\fB\-\-highlight\fR \fIon|off\fR
Enable or disable syntax highlighting.
.TP
\fB\-\-timeout\-ms\fR \fIN\fR
Network fetch timeout for URL inputs, in milliseconds.
.TP
\fB\-\-color=disabled\fR
Disable ANSI colors.
.TP
\fB\-\-continue\-on\-error\fR
In script mode, continue running statements after errors.
.TP
\fB\-\-quiet\fR
In script mode, reduce progress output.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Show command help.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Show version and provenance string.
.SH EXPLORE MODE
\fBmarkql explore\fR opens an interactive DOM explorer.
Common keys:
Up/Down move, Right or Enter expand, Left collapse, \fB/\fR search,
\fBn\fR/\fBN\fR next/previous match, \fBj\fR/\fBk\fR scroll inner HTML,
\fB+\fR/\fB\-\fR zoom inner HTML, \fBq\fR quit.
.SH QUERY NOTES
SQL comments are supported in scripts and REPL input:
\fB\-\-\fR line comments and \fB/* ... */\fR block comments.

Export sinks are available in query text:
\fBTO CSV('file.csv')\fR,
\fBTO JSON('file.json')\fR,
\fBTO NDJSON('file.ndjson')\fR,
and \fBTO PARQUET('file.parquet')\fR (when built with Arrow/Parquet support).
CSV mode renders rectangular results to stdout. For \fBTO TABLE()\fR extraction, use
\fBTO TABLE(EXPORT='file.csv')\fR instead of \fB\-\-mode csv\fR.

Artifact compatibility rules:
\fB.mqd\fR and \fB.mqp\fR files embed magic bytes, format versions, producer/language version metadata,
required-feature flags, and a payload checksum.
Readers treat artifacts as untrusted data: they reject incompatible major versions, unknown required flags,
malformed UTF-8 text fields, oversized sections/counts, and corrupted payloads with explicit errors.
The outer MarkQL artifact envelope remains custom. In this release, only the \fBDOCN\fR payload inside
\fB.mqd\fR uses FlatBuffers with verifier checks; \fB.mqp\fR prepared-query payloads remain on the existing
manual format. Compression is not used in the MVP artifact format.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Success.
.TP
\fB1\fR
Query parse/runtime failure, or lint found one or more ERROR diagnostics.
.TP
\fB2\fR
CLI usage/IO failure.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run one query from file input:
\fBmarkql \-\-query "SELECT table FROM doc" \-\-input ./data/index.html\fR
.TP
Lint a query without execution:
\fBmarkql \-\-lint "SELECT FROM doc"\fR
.TP
Lint and output JSON diagnostics:
\fBmarkql \-\-lint "SELECT FROM doc" \-\-format json\fR
.TP
Run in REPL mode:
\fBmarkql \-\-interactive \-\-input ./data/index.html\fR
.TP
Create and run artifacts:
\fBmarkql \-\-input ./data/index.html \-\-write\-mqd ./cache/index.mqd\fR

\fBmarkql \-\-query "SELECT a.href FROM doc WHERE href IS NOT NULL" \-\-write\-mqp ./cache/links.mqp\fR

\fBmarkql \-\-query\-file ./cache/links.mqp \-\-input ./cache/index.mqd\fR
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI/usr/bin/markql\fR
Primary CLI binary.
.TP
\fI/usr/share/man/man1/markql.1\fR
Manual page.
